Update docs/configuring-well-known.md and docs/installing.md (#3767)
spantaleev/matrix-docker-ansible-deploy: docs/configuring-well-known.md

Service discovery is a way for the Matrix network to discover where a Matrix server is.

## Types of well-known service discovery mechanism

There are 3 types of well-known service discovery mechanism that Matrix makes use of:

> - (important) **Federation Server discovery** (`/.well-known/matrix/server`) -- assists other servers in the Matrix network with finding your server. **This is necessary for federation to work.** Without a proper configuration, your server will effectively not be part of the Matrix network.

Reviewer: The default and reasonable setup is to have short identifiers (e.g. `@user:example.com`). This is achieved by using `matrix_domain: example.com` in the `vars.yml` file.

By following the sample `vars.yml` (`examples/vars.yml`), you'll get a setup like this.

Most people do not actually target the `example.com` server though. They usually run a website there, etc., and wish to install Matrix on `matrix.example.com`.

The playbook defaults ask you for the base domain (in the `matrix_domain` variable), but assume that installation is done against the `matrix.{{ matrix_domain }}` server.

If you're following these defaults, you will end up with a Matrix homeserver which:

- has a `server_name` Synapse configuration setting that matches `matrix_domain` (that is `example.com`)
- is exposing its APIs at `matrix.example.com`

This is OK and usable at least locally, but for federation to work, you need to do the delegation step (`/.well-known/matrix/server`).

`/.well-known/matrix/client` is **not so important**. Your server is correctly configured and will federate even if you only have the `/.well-known/matrix/server` file in place. The `client` file is just (a highly recommended) assistance file that helps clients find your homeserver. It lets:

- users type `@user:example.com` in the "Username" field
- .. which will make the client application hit `https://example.com/.well-known/matrix/client` and see that this server's full homeserver URL is actually `https://matrix.example.com`
- .. so the client will configure the homeserver URL correctly

Without `/.well-known/matrix/client`, the client will make the wrong "homeserver URL" assumption (it will default to using `https://example.com` and users will need to notice and adjust it manually (changing it to `https://matrix.example.com`).

If you use Element Web as configured by the playbook, the homeserver URLs are set/hardcoded correctly, so you won't be inconvenienced by this, but with any other client you will need to do manual work adjusting the homeserver URL value.

So while the lack of `/.well-known/matrix/client` file can potentially be a serious inconvenience, it's not a critical blocker to having your server work (it will federate) and to having clients connect to it (they can, but manual work may be involved).

This is the reason that the `/.well-known/matrix/client` file was originally labelled with `(not that important)`. Perhaps this label makes it sound too unimportant though. Perhaps your new label (`(less important)`) is somewhat better in making the `client` file sound "a bit more important" than before.

---------

To get back to the topic of federation delegation (the `/.well-known/matrix/server` file)..

People can also host their server directly on `matrix.example.com` and have uglier (long) identifiers like `@user:matrix.example.com`. They can then skip the whole "federation delegation thing" and the base domain will be optional.

However, this kind of set up is **non-default**. It's covered by these FAQ questions:

- [Why install my server at matrix.example.com and not at the base domain?](https://github.com/spantaleev/matrix-docker-ansible-deploy/blob/58a8f79d951c46b81f1642935b417c0fe2c3a498/docs/faq.md#why-install-my-server-at-matrixexamplecom-and-not-at-the-base-domain)
- [How do I install on matrix.example.com without involving the base domain?](https://github.com/spantaleev/matrix-docker-ansible-deploy/blob/58a8f79d951c46b81f1642935b417c0fe2c3a498/docs/faq.md#how-do-i-install-on-matrixexamplecom-without-involving-the-base-domain)

For this kind of setup, various variables need to be introduced to `vars.yml` (compared to the sample configuration we recommend to people).

So.. in the general case (following the sample `vars.yml` config and getting a nicely configured server with short identifiers), setting up delegation on the base domain is required.

> - (important) **Federation Server discovery** (`/.well-known/matrix/server`) -- assists other servers in the Matrix network with finding your server. **This is necessary for federation to work.** Without a proper configuration, your server will effectively not be part of the Matrix network.

Reviewer: Below, I'll try to answer your questions more directly/succinctly.

------

> I would like to be corrected if I take it incorrectly (I think it is pretty likely…), but as far as I could understand, setting up DNS SRV record or a `/.well-known/matrix/server` file for Federation Server discovery is required for federation to work, only if base domain is served in order to set up an ID like `@user:example.com`.

True. Delegation is only required for getting short identifiers (`@user:example.com`), while you're setting up a server not on `example.com`, but on another hostname (like `matrix.example.com`).

That said, the default playbook setup (as recommended by the sample `vars.yml` file in `examples/vars.yml`) is exactly like that:

- you only configure the base domain in `matrix_domain`
- all other domains (e.g. `matrix.example.com`) are calculated from that base domain value in `matrix_domain`
- the playbook installs against the server and assumes its hostname is indeed `matrix.example.com`
- the playbook configures the (Synapse) homeserver installed to presents itself as `example.com` (`server_name: example.com` in the Synapse configuration)
- due to this mismatch between what Synapse presents itself as (`example.com`) and what the actual hostname is (`matrix.example.com`), server delegation (`/.well-known/matrix/server` setup on the base domain) is necessary for this default configuration

-------

> So, if matrix.example.com is used by default AND it is indeed fine for user ID to be @user:matrix.example.com, then setting up Server Delegation is not required, and therefore nothing needs to be done for Federation Server discovery, right?

For "nothing needs to be done for Federation Server discovery", one needs a more complicated (non-default) setup as described in the FAQ entries:

- [Why install my server at matrix.example.com and not at the base domain?](https://github.com/spantaleev/matrix-docker-ansible-deploy/blob/58a8f79d951c46b81f1642935b417c0fe2c3a498/docs/faq.md#why-install-my-server-at-matrixexamplecom-and-not-at-the-base-domain)
- [How do I install on matrix.example.com without involving the base domain?](https://github.com/spantaleev/matrix-docker-ansible-deploy/blob/58a8f79d951c46b81f1642935b417c0fe2c3a498/docs/faq.md#how-do-i-install-on-matrixexamplecom-without-involving-the-base-domain)

By following the standard guide (as recommended by the sample `vars.yml` file in `examples/vars.yml`), federation setup work (`/.well-known/matrix/server` setup on the base domain) is necessary. Your server will work locally even without this setup, but federation requires it.

> - (important) **Federation Server discovery** (`/.well-known/matrix/server`) -- assists other servers in the Matrix network with finding your server. **This is necessary for federation to work.** Without a proper configuration, your server will effectively not be part of the Matrix network.

Author: Thanks for the detailed replies! I will reflect those points to the PR :smile:

### Serving the base domain from the Matrix server via the playbook

If you don't have a server for your base domain at all, you can use the Matrix server for this. If you don't need the base domain (e.g. `example.com`) for anything else (hosting a website, etc.), you can point it to the Matrix server's IP address and tell the playbook to configure it.

**This is the easiest way to set up well-known serving** -- letting the playbook handle the whole base domain for you (including SSL certificates, etc.) and take care to serve the appropriate well-known files automatically.

If you decide to go this route, you don't need to read ahead in this document. Instead, go to [Serving the base domain](configuring-playbook-base-domain-serving.md) to learn how the playbook can help you set it up.

However, if you need to use the base domain for other things, this method is less suitable than the one explained below.

### Manually installing well-known files on the base domain's server

If you're managing the base domain by yourself somehow, you'll need to set up serving of some `/.well-known/matrix/*` files from it via HTTPS.

> To make things easy for you to set up, this playbook generates and hosts 2 well-known files on the Matrix domain's server. The files are generated at `/matrix/static-files/.well-known/matrix/` and hosted at `https://matrix.example.com/.well-known/matrix/server` and `https://matrix.example.com/.well-known/matrix/client`, even though this is the wrong place to host them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make things easy for you to set up, this playbook generates and hosts a few well-known files on the Matrix domain's server. The files are generated at the `/matrix/static-files/public/.well-known/matrix/` path on the server and hosted at URLs like `https://matrix.example.com/.well-known/matrix/server` and `https://matrix.example.com/.well-known/matrix/client`, even though this is the wrong place to host them.
```

"A few" (instead of `2`), because a 3rd (`support`) file may also be generated, if enabled.

The file path on the server was also incorrect (everything is nested under a `public/` directory).

Author: Doh, that's right!
